=head1 NAME

X12::Parser::Readme - understanding configuration (cf) files 
for X12::Parser

=head2 X12 transactions

ASC X12 standards define commonly used EDI transactions. The
standards define a structure/format for exchange of EDI data.

Each transaction type is called a "transaction set". The smallest
data item in a transaction is called an "element". Groups of related
elements form a data segment. A data element separator separates
the elements within a segment. A segment starts with a element
which is called the segment ID, and ends with a segment
terminator.

Logical groups of segments are called loops. There are some
segments, which are used only to identify the beginning of a loop,
these are called as control segments. A logical set of loops
together form a "transaction set".

Similar transaction sets can be lumped together by enclosing them
in data segments that are known as functional group headers and
trailers. Functional groups are grouped together using interchange
control headers and trailers.

=head2 Parsing

Unlike XML/HTML parsers which relies on "<" and ">" tags to
determine start and end of data blocks, X12 transactions rely on
pre-defined values (segment IDs) to indicate start and end of
related data blocks (loops). Developing a parser that would work
for all X12 transactions poses a challenge in this respect, as each
transaction has its own hierarchy of loops and start/end indicators.

This lead to the development of the X12 configuration file (I<cf>)
specification. The cf specification is created to specify details
regarding the blocks/loops and start/end information in a common
format. Cf files can be created for the different transaction sets.
(see section I<Building a cf file>). 

Now you can parse your EDI data file by invoking the X12::Parser 
specifying the cf file to use. This allows you to parse any X12 
transaction data files just by building the cf file for that
transaction type.

=head2 Cf file specification for X12::Parser

The cf file specifies any transaction in a hierarchical form. It
identifies the loops and segments in a transaction. This
information is used to parse the transaction file. The X12::Parser
uses the X12::Parser::Cf module to read the cf file information before
parsing a transaction file. Since the X12::Parser parses files based
on the cf file it allows the user to parse different X12 transaction
types just by using the appropriate cf file. The user can use the cf
files that are bundled with this package or create new cf files. The
cf provided with this package is for the HIPAA X12 Ver 4010
X12 transactions.

A cf file has two types of information: I<section> and I<key=value>
pairs. A section contains information in key=value pairs.

=head3 section

Sections are identified by the square brackets ("[" and "]"). Section
represents loops (or logical blocks) in a X12 transaction. The
name of the loop or the block is specified in square brackets. The
section I<[LOOPS]> is mandatory in a configuration file. It consists
only the names of the top level loops instead of key=value pairs.
The X12::Parser::Cf cf file reader starts reading a cf file from the
[LOOPS] section.

=head3 key=value

There are two predefined keys, which are recognized by the Cf
file reader, namely: I<segment> and I<loop>. Segment key is used to
define the segments that are part of the current section/loop. The
loop key is used to define the sub-loops or the child loops for the
current section/loop.

Note: The term section and loop is used interchangeably as a
section in the cf file represents a loop in a X12 transaction.

Within a section, the first key=value pair represents the start of 
the loop. Each section/loop should have atleast one key=value
pair for the X12::Parser to identify the loop in the X12 transaction
file. Although the X12::Parser::Cf modules reads all the key=value
pairs, the X12::Parser uses only the first key=value pair to
identify the loops. The user may specify only the first key=value
pairs for each loop.

Value itself consists of 6 fields separated by I<':'>. All values 
are not currently used.

	  key=value1:value2:value3:value4:value5:value6

When parsing a X12 transaction file, the values help the
X12::Parser determine if a segment is the start of a loop.

a. value1, is the segment id for a segment in a X12 transaction.
The first key=value pair within a section tells the X12::Parser
how to identify the loop.

b. In some cases, to identify a loop correctly it is not enough 
to look at the segment id, you need to look at the qualifier too.

value2 and value3 are used to specify this. value2 is used to
specify the position on the segment that the X12::Parser should
look for value3. value3 consists of a I<','> separated list of qualifiers.

c. value4 is a description of the segment. (not used)

d. value5 indicates if the segment is required or situational. (not used)

e. value6 indicates the allowable repeat count for the segment.(not used)

Currently values 1, 2 and 3 are used for parsing the transaction
file. The others may be used in later versions of this package.

=head2 Limitations 

The X12::Parser::Cf module does not do validation of the Cf files. Since the 
goal of the X12::Parser module is to parse X12 files, the X12::Parser::Cf 
module is very minimal. The user should ensure that the cf files 
are appropriate.

Do not put extra spaces after [ ] sections. Do not have leading 
spaces for section name and key=value pairs. Lines with a leading #,
are considered comments.

To validate if X12::Parser::Cf is reading the cf file correctly try 
something like 

 use X12::Parser::Cf;

 my $cf = new X12::Parser::Cf;
 $cf->load("sample.cf");

 for (my $i=0; $i<@{$cf->{'looptree'}}; $i++) {
   print "$cf->{'looptree'}->[$i][0]\t";          #- loop level
   print "$cf->{'looptree'}->[$i][1]\t";          #- loop name
   print "$cf->{'segmentstart'}->{$loop}->[0]\n"; #- loop start
 }

This would print a list of loop levels, loop names and loop start segment 
information. If this doesn't look like what you wanted, go back and fix 
your cf file.

=head2 Building a cf file

Lets take the case of building a cf file for Version 004010 of
ANSI ASC X12.85, Health Care Claim Payment/Advice (835) transaction.

=head3 835 transaction

A 835 transaction structure would contain the following loops.

    ISA
    |-- GS
        |-- ST
            |-- 1000A
            |-- 1000B
            |-- 2000
                |-- 2100
                |-- 2110
        |-- SE
    |-- GE
    IEA

The above diagram shows the hierarchy of the loops. The data segments
are not shown.

=head3 Sample cf file

     /-------------------------------------------------\
     | ### start of the configuration file ###         |
 (1) | [LOOPS]                                         |
 (2) | ISA                                             |
     | IEA                                             |
     |                                                 |
     | #--- start of loop details ---#                 |
 (3) | [ISA]                                           |
 (4) | segment=ISA:::Interchange Control Header:R:1    |
 (5) | loop=GS                                         |
     |                                                 |
 (6) | [GS]                                            |
     | segment=GS:::Functional Group Header:R:1        |
     | loop=ST                                         |
     |                                                 |
 (7) | [ST]                                            |
     | segment=ST:1:835:Transaction Set Header:R:1     |
 (8) | loop=1000A                                      |
     | loop=1000B                                      |
     | loop=2000                                       |
     |                                                 |
     | [1000A]                                         |
 (9) | segment=N1:1:PR:Payer Identification:R:1        |
     |                                                 |
     | [1000B]                                         |
     | segment=N1:1:PE:Payee Identification:R:1        |
     |                                                 |
     | [2000]                                          |
     | segment=LX:::Header Number:S:1                  |
     | loop=2100                                       |
     | loop=2110                                       |
     |                                                 |
     | [2100]                                          |
     | segment=CLP:::Claim Payment Information:R:1     |
     |                                                 |
     | [2110]                                          |
     | segment=SVC:::Service Payment Information:S:1   |
     |                                                 |
     | [SE]                                            |
     | segment=SE:::Transaction Set Trailer:R:1        |
     |                                                 |
     | [GE]                                            |
     | segment=GE:::Functional Group Trailer:R:1       |
     |                                                 |
 (3) | [IEA]                                           |
     | segment=IEA:::Interchange Group Trailer:R:1     |
     | ### end of the configuration file ###           |
     \-------------------------------------------------/

=head3 Description

(1) LOOPS section is mandatory. Add the main loops under this section.
Here we have added ISA and IEA loops (2). These are the top level loops.
 
(3) Create a section for each of the loops mentioned under LOOPS
 
(4) use the segment key to specify how the X12::Parser should determine
the start of the ISA loop. We will explain the fields better when we
come to (9).
 
(5) if any, specify the sub-loops for ISA segment. In the above 
example GS is a sub loop for ISA. In there are more than one 
sub loops under ISA specify them too using the loop keyword. See (8)
how three sub loops are specified.
 
(6) create a section for all loops specified under section ISA. Here it
is GS. Use the section key and if there are any sub loops use the loop
key to define their values.
 
Follow the same procedure to define all the loops and sub-loops.
 
(9) Here's a description of the fields of the values for segment.
       segment=N1:1:PR:Payer Identification:R:1
               |  |  |            |         | |
              (a)(b)(c)          (d)       (e)(f)

   (a) specify the segment id here. Loop 1000A starts with N1 so 
       specify N1 here.

   (b) and (c), there are cases when the segment id does not uniquely
       identify a loop. For eg. Loop 1000A and 1000B both start
       with N1 segment id. When parsing a transaction file, if the 
       parser encounters a segment starting with N1, it needs additional
       information to decide if it is Loop 1000A or 1000B. 
       This is done by specifying the the qualifier information 
       in the fields (b) and (c).
       (b) specify the position in the X12 segment where the parser 
           should look for the qualifier specified in (c).
          
       If there are multiple qualifiers which identify a loop, specify
       all of them in position (c) separated by a comma.

   (d) This is the description of the segment. You may leave this 
       blank. (not used)

   (e) Specify if the segment is required or situational. (not used)

   (f) Specify the number of times the segment can be repeated.
       (not used)

       The fields (d) (e) and (f) are not used currently, but later
       releases may support these fields.


=head1 SEE ALSO

o For details on Transaction sets refer to:
National Electronic Data Interchange Transaction Set Implementaion Guide.
Implementation guides are available for all the Transaction sets.

o I<X12::Parser::Readme> for more information on the Parser and
  configuration files.

o I<X12::Parser::Cf>

If you have a mailing list set up for your module, mention it here.

If you have a web site set up for your module, mention it here.

=head1 AUTHOR

Prasad Poruporuthan, I<prasad@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2003 by Prasad Poruporuthan

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
